Hello and welcome.
This is the advanced OpenCL course
where we're going to be taking you
into the nuts and bolts of how to
use OpenCL within your applications.
My name is Derek Gerstmann,
and let's get started.
So I think with the introduction
of multi-core processors and
especially programmable GPUs,
there's sort of been this looming
question that I think a lot of
us have been asking ourselves.
What if we could use all the
compute devices in our Macs
to make our applications run
faster and do more stuff?
Wouldn't that be great?
And ultimately,
I think OpenCL is one giant step
forward in providing a solution and an
answer to this overwhelming question.
So in this session,
what we're going to be getting
into is how to develop kernels and
applications with OpenCL and how
to combine OpenCL with OpenGL for
advanced visual processing.
So OpenCL is provided as a
framework that fits within the
graphics and media layer for OS X.
It's a first class citizen and sits
alongside all the other frameworks that
you're probably already familiar with.
In addition,
OpenCL has been designed to work
efficiently with OpenGL so you can share
data for advanced visual processing.
[Transcript missing]
Some basic OpenCL concepts that I'm going
to be using throughout my slides here
are going to get into address spaces
as well as threads and thread blocks.
In terms of address spaces,
OpenCL describes a memory hierarchy
that maps onto current generation
compute devices where threads have
varying scopes in terms of how
they can access and modify memory.
At the highest level,
we've got global memory,
which is read/write for
all threads in a kernel.
We also have local memory,
which is read/write for all
threads running in a thread block.
And then finally, we have private memory,
which is read/write only for a
single thread in its local scope.
And the hierarchy here that we're
describing in terms of threads
is indicated by this diagram
that we've got here on the right,
where a thread is a single execution...
a single work unit executing on a device,
which is included within
a group of threads,
which is running on a compute device,
which can be composed of within a
logical grouping called a device group.
So a device group consists
of multiple compute devices,
which have multiple thread groups,
which contain multiple threads.
And ultimately,
this is how OpenCL exposes this.
these device resources.
So some basic OpenCL usage.
First thing that we need to do is
connect to one or more devices,
create a device group,
create a context which provides
us with a command stream for
submitting to a specific device,
allocate some device memory for
storing the results of a computation,
load and compile a compute kernel,
set our kernel arguments,
and then execute the
kernel and use the results.
And then we can just repeat as
much as necessary to get the
results of our computation.
And then finally,
we just need to shut down
and release system resources.
Thank you.
So to start, let's just go through a very
basic example for biasing
and scaling some coordinates.
You can think of this as generating
UV coordinates for texture maps or
just a uniform two-dimensional mapping.
So here we have a very simple kernel,
which is going to be executing
across a two-dimensional domain.
Here we've got three parameters, bias,
scale, and result.
Bias and scale are going to be two
constant values that we're going
to use to modify our coordinates.
Result is an array of
two-dimensional float values.
You can notice here that we have a
global specifier for this parameter,
which is indicating the memory
address scope for this value.
Global means that it's going to be
allocated from the memory address scope.
It's from the application side,
so that all threads are going
to have read/write access.
And then finally,
you notice the kernel intrinsic here,
which is dictating that this
method will be exported and can be
called from the application side.
And as far as what this
kernel is actually doing,
we're using the global thread ID in
two dimensions and scaling that
based on our global domain size.
So we're going to use this global
thread ID in two dimensions,
and scaling that based on
our global domain size,
to normalize the coordinates,
which are then biased and scaled,
and then stored within the result array.
So now we've got our compute kernel.
Let's use it.
So first we need to connect
to our compute device,
which in this case,
we're going to request a single GPU,
create a context for our command stream,
and then allocate some device memory.
Here we're going to create a 128
by 128 two-dimensional array,
which we're going to ask for as
read/write usage in terms of being able
to both read and modify the array values.
And then finally,
we're going to create our program
from a source string that's just
loaded as a standard C string,
currently in host memory,
build and compile that executable,
and then ask for the entry
point for our kernel method
that we declared previously,
which was that bias_c.
and scale core 2D method.
Next,
we just need to set our kernel arguments.
So these are application-dependent
values that we would normally call
within just a normal function.
We just need to pass these on to OpenCL.
So for our bias and scale values,
we're going to use minus 1
and minus 1 for our bias,
and scale is going to be 2.0 and 2.0.
So this will modify the origin,
set it back,
and create values ranging from
negative 1 to positive 1 across
a two-dimensional domain.
So we just pack our arg values
by passing in the memory location
for each one of these variables,
and then specify the total size
in bytes for each one of these.
So now that we've
passed in our arguments,
we just need to specify
our global domain size,
the number of threads that we wish
to issue across each dimension.
This is handled by the global
dimensions and local dimensional
arrays that I specify here.
So we're just going to keep things
simple and issue 128 by 128.
And notice the number two there,
which is being used to indicate that we
are executing a two-dimensional kernel.
And then once this finishes,
we can read the data back into host
memory and use the results for whatever
we wish to within our application.
And if we examine this two-dimensional
array as a bitmap or an image,
we can see here that we've generated
a gradient which has values ranging
from minus one to minus one,
to positive one and positive one.
So let's take this further and
actually see if we can use this
to generate some Perlin noise.
So here we've got a compute kernel,
and this is going to be implementing
Perlin's improved noise function.
And we're going to start off by declaring
some arrays of constant data that
we're going to reference as basically
a lookup table within our compute kernel.
So the first array here is p,
which is just Perlin's
recommended permutation table,
which contains pseudo-random
numbers of a size of 256.
Next we're going to create an
array of gradient directions,
which indicate the direction from
the center of a cube to its edges.
And we're going to extend it to 16
so we can avoid a division by 12.
Next we have our smoothing kernel,
which is just a cubic spline smoothing
function to combine values that
we calculate across lattice cells.
Next we're going to have a helper
routine for computing this value at each
gradient location by passing in a lattice
coordinate and its fractional offset
to use that to index into our permutation
array and calculate a contribution value.
Thank you.
To actually evaluate the noise function,
we're going to have
another helper routine,
which basically computes our fractional
offset and our lattice coordinate,
indexes into all of the surrounding
neighboring lattice cells,
and computes a contribution
value for each one of those
based on the gradient directions.
And then combines those using the
smoothing function that we specified
previously to form our final contribution
value at that location in space.
So those were helper routines.
The actual entry point is going
to be our compute kernel here,
which we call Perlin Noise 2D.
We're passing in the same parameters
that I illustrated in my last example,
where we've got a bias
and a scale factor.
And in this example,
we're going to store the results in an
image to make it easier to visualize.
So you'll notice that
everything's basically the same,
except we're going to now use our
coordinate as an input into our
improved Perlin Noise function
that we declared previously.
And then we're going to use the resulting
value to write and update our array.
Or sorry, image in this case.
So I'm going to go ahead and demo that.
So here we have a Perlin noise
function that we're evaluating
across two-dimensional domain.
This is 1024 by 1024,
and on a single GPU,
performance is upwards
of 450 frames a second.
And ultimately,
this is because we aren't doing
any memory reads whatsoever.
Everything is just a lookup table,
and we're actually just
doing a pure data generation.
So, scaling and biasing.
We can zoom in and out and
modify our coordinates.
And one of the examples that I'm
going to be showing in just a
second is going to be using this
as a basis for doing displacement.
So, if we sum up multiple
octaves of Perlin noise,
we get some higher level detail,
and we can use this as an
interesting means for textures.
And this is what I'm going to
be using for my displacement
demo in just a minute.
So, we can switch back to the slides.
So now that we have some basic
understanding of how to execute kernels
and what's needed to connect to devices,
let's look at using OpenCL with OpenGL.
And this really provides
us the best of both.
We can use OpenGL for rendering for
all of our existing geometric data,
and then OpenCL for doing simulations
and more advanced rendering techniques.
One of the great things about OpenCL is
that it provides direct access to memory
that's allocated and managed by OpenGL.
This means that we can reference
data on the device without
copying it back across the host.
Our general usage here is all we
have to do is create and allocate
the object or memory in OpenGL and
then just reference it in OpenCL.
Then we can use attachments as
a means for allowing OpenCL to
modify the data and then detach
so that OpenGL can then use it.
So in this example,
we're going to create a vertex
buffer object using a standard
gen buffer and bind buffer,
which you should all be familiar
with in terms of OpenGL programming.
The main thing that I want to point
out here is that we're issuing
the GL static draw usage flag,
which is very important.
This is indicating that as
far as OpenGL is concerned,
this data is not going to
be updated from OpenGL.
From CL, we're actually going to be
modifying the values ourselves,
but OpenGL, there's not going to be
any more data submission.
This ensures that there's not
going to be an additional copy,
and we're just referencing the data.
Then in OpenCL,
we just need to create an array passing
in the memalloc reference usage flag,
which simply states the device
is already out -- the memory has
already been allocated on the device.
There's no need to
allocate any more memory.
Simply use the memory address
for this particular buffer.
And we can then attach the existing
VBO using a CL attach GL buffer method,
execute our kernel,
and then detach to give
control back over to OpenGL.
And then here we just bind our buffer
and then issue a GL draw elements call,
and the data's already been updated,
and we get the results.
The other usage pattern that we
can use with sharing data between
OpenCL and OpenGL is to allocate
and manage the data in OpenCL.
This might be useful if you're doing,
you know,
if you're generating data in OpenCL,
or if you're dealing
with unusual formats,
or if you simply want to use
OpenCL on one device and OpenGL on
another device and actually do need
to copy the data between devices.
So our general use of share is we
just create an allocated OpenCL,
read and write via the OpenCL kernel,
and then copy the results back to OpenGL.
So very similar,
except this time we're going
to be creating and allocating
the memory in OpenCL.
We're going to use the
mem read write usage flag,
which I was using previously.
Execute our kernel,
and then read the data back into
host memory that's already been
allocated in our application.
That's the data array.
And then submit this to OpenGL.
So here we are copying from the
device back into our application,
submitting to OpenGL,
which is going to be slower,
but it gives us more flexibility
in terms of what we can do.
So, as an example of sharing data
between OpenGL and OpenCL,
I'm going to show you this
geometric displacement demo
that I was talking about.
Here we're going to create
a GL vertex buffer object,
fill it with some initial positions,
attach, and then use within OpenCL.
We're going to evaluate several
octaves of Perlin noise,
move the vertex positions in
the direction of the normal,
which is the normal outward direction,
and then detach and
then render with OpenGL.
So let's switch over to the demo.
So, like I was saying,
we're initially submitting just a sphere,
which is a whole bunch of vertices,
and then using that as our
inputs to our OpenCL kernel,
we evaluate that Perlin noise
function at that location in space,
and then modify the vertex locations
by pushing out in the normal direction.
Then we also take three more samples
using finite differences to compute a
new normal at that location in space,
and then all the rendering
is being done by OpenGL.
So here we've got several different
shaders to give us Fong illumination,
and then we're also doing
perspective-corrected shadow maps so
that we get a highly detailed shadow,
and we're also jittering the sample
at the edges of the shadow map.
to give us a nice soft blend.
We can also adjust some parameters
of the noise evaluation,
so we can increase and
decrease the frequency,
and modify the number of
octaves that we're calculating.
Increase the amplitude.
And then just as another
demonstration of what we can do
on the rendering side of things,
we can also use this for
reflection and refraction.
And we're also doing some
chromatic dispersion.
So we're using the Fresnel
calculations for doing the reflection
and the refraction coefficients.
And then we're also simulating the
chromatic dispersion by assuming
that each channel of color is a
different wavelength of light,
which is going to refract differently.
That's how you get the highlights
to have drastically different
colors as the light gets refracted.
Okay, back to slides.
Okay, and one other demo that I want to
show you here is a smooth particle
hydrodynamics fluid simulation.
This was actually shown in John's
State of the Union for the graphics
and media session that you might
have seen earlier this week.
So SPH is a simulation
method for free surface flow.
It uses the Navier-Stokes equations
for fluid motion by calculating a
weighted sum of physical values.
So you can think of this as
a 3D convolution of forces.
And the algorithm that I've implemented
here is for every single frame,
we're going to compute particle
positions based on the forces.
And then we're going to dynamically
fill a uniform grid with particles
in grid cell coordinates.
We're going to use that as an
acceleration structure to identify
nearest neighbors so that we
don't have to compare ourselves
against every single particle.
So we only look at our
neighboring grid cells based on
our current particle location.
From this, we're going to create
a nearest neighbor map.
from the uniform grid
that I just mentioned.
And then for every particle,
we're going to evaluate density,
pressure, curvature,
and viscosity contributions
based on the particle attributes.
From this, we can define forces,
which we can update and
integrate per time step.
And then finally,
create a distance field based
on the particle locations,
which I'm gonna store
as just a 3D texture.
And then ultimately use that for a
volume ray casting for the rendering.
So let me switch back
over to the demo machine.
So here we have the Stanford bunny
sitting within this pedestal.
And as I mentioned,
this is a 3D texture which we're
using as an input to a raycast
volume shader so that we can do the
rendering and then also calculating
reflection and refraction,
similar to the previous
geometric displacement demo.
So he melts in a fluid-like fashion.
And we've got upwards of
34,000 particles here.
And for this particular demo,
we're actually doing the rendering on
one GPU and the simulation on another,
and then moving the data between
devices to do the rendering
and updates for every frame.
And you can also interact with this,
so you can splash things around.
And with about 35,000 particles and
doing all of the force calculations
and the texture generation,
we're getting on the order
of 40 to 50 frames a second,
depending on how tightly packed
each particle is in terms
of its location in space.
We can actually get this up
to about 100,000 particles
and still be interactive.
So, as a segue into the next presenters'
sections within this course,
I just wanted to give you some
brief optimization strategies
for developing OpenCL kernels.
Overall,
you really want to maximize computation.
You need to keep the
device as busy as possible.
And the best way to do that is to
minimize the amount of memory that you're
using and use that memory effectively.
So make sure that it's as close to
the current thread that's running
and utilize your caches efficiently.
And I tried to illustrate this with
these two best and worst case scenarios.
So the best case is to have uniform
memory access where every thread is
accessing memory from a unique location,
doing a whole bunch of work,
using a linear execution,
so not too much branching,
not too many if statements,
and then writing to unique
destinations within your output buffer.
This will give you ideally
the best performance.
The worst case is to read from random
locations a whole bunch of data,
do a whole bunch of branching
and iteration in arbitrary
ways within your kernel,
and then scatter and write
to random output locations.
By doing this,
you're going to force the device
to be able to run the kernel in a
way that is not too much branching,
not too many if statements,
and then writing to unique
destinations within your output buffer.
So you can basically blow out all
of its caches and force data to get
transferred way too frequently and
also decrease performance drastically.
So you can sort of judge this and
see that for most applications you're
going to fit somewhere in between,
but you can use this as a
guideline for best practices.
Also on the OpenGL side of things,
you should really focus on referencing
data that's been managed in OpenGL and
just use those as your memory outputs.
So don't allocate memory through OpenCL.
Simply reference and use
OpenGL managed memory.
Then you don't incur
the copy across the bus.
And then also something else that
I didn't have time to talk about
is you can actually separate out
your rendering from your computation
using asynchronous execution.
So OpenCL allows you to execute
a kernel asynchronously.
And you can just let it sit there and
run and then get an event indicating that
the kernel is finished and use that as a
means for updating your rendering thread.
So in summary,
OpenCL provides a very straightforward
programming model for performing data
parallel computation that's incredibly
flexible and incredibly powerful,
and also integrates seamlessly
with OpenGL to enable you as a
developer to perform some really
advanced visual processing and use
cutting edge rendering techniques.
And with that, I'd like to hand it over
to Ian Buck from NVIDIA.
Okay, hi.
So I'm Ian Buck.
I actually did my doctorate research
in GPU computing back in the day,
and I'm excited that now all
this is becoming a reality.
It's been a pleasure working with Apple.
I drive all of the computing
software at NVIDIA,
and we've been working tightly with them,
obviously, on OpenCL.
So the purpose of my talk is
basically to give you an idea,
a conceptual model of some of the
differences between the GPU and a CPU.
And I want to emphasize that a GPU is
not just a CPU with more cores.
It really is a fundamentally
different kind of processor.
And it had to be in order to deal
with the level of parallelism
that we want to exploit.
We have hundreds of
cores in our processors.
Each core is capable of maintaining
thousands of threads at the same time.
And as a result,
it's much less dependent on caches.
We can spend more of our diary
on ALU and on computation than
traditional caching architectures.
So the outline for this talk,
I'm going to highlight three key things
that emphasize how GPUs are different.
First is the importance
of filling up GPUs.
There was a question earlier
about how many threads do
you really want to kick off,
and I'll talk about that.
Using the local memory,
that's a big advantage
that we have on the GPU.
And I'll dig into that in terms of
performance and give some examples.
Secondly,
optimizing for that memory performance.
The previous speaker talked about
scatter and gather and how making
a linear kind of problem can really
present the best kind of memory access
pattern to the memory subsystems.
So first, filling up the GPU.
There was a question earlier, you know,
if I have a 10 million pixel image,
do I really want to kick
off 10 million threads?
And the answer is yes.
I mean, GPUs just love threading.
You know, bring it.
So that's how we keep the GPU busy.
Today's GPUs have 16 processors,
each with 8 cores.
Henry talked about that this morning.
8800GT has a total of 128 cores.
Threads are really cheap
in our architecture.
We've built our architecture
to absorb that many threads.
We actually have dedicated
hardware support for context
switching between those threads.
And we'll actually switch on every
instruction to another thread
in order to keep the GPU busy,
whether it be the ALU functional
units or the memory subsystem.
So more threads, the better.
The thread groups as part of
the OpenCL model are distributed
across the different processors.
So we're actually going to be
processing the threads and the
thread groups concurrently.
There's a first question,
how many threads do I really
need in order to get it working?
Obviously you want to kick
off more than one thread,
but typically you want to kick
off at least the number of thread
groups as you have processors.
On the 8800GT,
that may be 16 of these processors.
But you can certainly go more,
and the GPU can queue
up millions of threads,
and that's not a problem.
It also means as GPUs
scale and get bigger,
and we add more
processors to NVIDIA GPUs,
your applications will scale
seamlessly because we can
execute more things in parallel.
So I want to talk about
filling up each processor.
We have that thread group,
which is a collection of threads.
How big should my thread groups be?
On current architectures,
we can support up to 768
threads per processor.
The more threads per group, the better.
Obviously, we'll use those threads.
The hardware will switch
between one thread to another
thread to keep the ALUs,
the cores, busy on the GPU.
The recommended minimum
is around 64 threads,
but certainly 256 threads is
a better choice that hides any
latencies that may be in the
pipelines within the architecture.
But certainly, you can grow further.
This is often algorithm dependent.
So you want to experiment,
just try different sizes.
See what makes sense for you.
Often the size of a thread group
is determined by the kinds of
memory blocking you're doing.
Things you may have used to do on
the cache for blocking for caches.
That thread group defines
typically your blocking size.
OpenCL also provides a function
called get kernel thread group info,
which can give you an idea of
based on how your code compiled,
number of registers, amount of resources,
what's a good optimal size for that
thread group to help you decide.
But certainly experiment.
So using the GPU's local memory.
The local memory is a dedicated
on-die memory that sits
right next to those ALUs.
It's as fast as registers to access.
You can think of it as an
indexable register file.
So it's orders of magnitude
faster than global memory.
We computed on the 8800GT,
you're pushing over 760
gigabytes of second of aggregate
bandwidth to that local memory.
So if you can move your
data from the global,
which is a around 70 to
80 gigabytes a second,
copy it into the local memory,
spin on it there,
you can actually get some
huge performance improvements.
So as an optimization tip,
first get your algorithm working,
then see if you can optimize
for that local memory.
A bit of detail about that memory.
It's banked.
It contains 16 banks.
Every word will service a different
bank based on the MSBs of the address
you're accessing in the local memory.
So you want to think about that if
you're doing some further perf-turning.
Once you've taken your
code into the local memory,
think about how your access patterns are
happening across the different threads.
Because that can further
give you more performance.
Today's GPUs, the local memory is 16
kilobytes per processor,
per thread group,
and the threads within that thread group
will be able to share that local memory.
Further optimizing for the global memory.
The previous speaker talked
a little bit about that.
Today it's about 80 gigabytes
of peak performance.
You want to think about how the
GPU is executing the threads.
On a CPU, you'll switch to one thread,
and that thread will
dominate that processor.
And you often want to optimize for
locality across different accesses.
So the first access will
read the first word,
the next one will read the next word,
the next one will read the next word.
And you know in your head that the
cache is trying to coalesce those
together and leverage the caching.
On a GPU,
we're running your threads in parallel,
all at the same time.
On current architectures,
we gang them together in groups of 32.
So instead of thinking about how threads,
how an individual thread is going to
access memory in its access pattern,
you want to think about
how the threads across,
across threads are accessing memory.
If the first thread's
reading the first word,
the second thread's
reading the next word,
the third thread's reading the next word,
that's going to look like one wide
memory to the memory subsystem.
And the GPUs are going to
optimize for that and get you
that 80 gigabytes a second.
So you need to turn your
thinking around a little bit.
The good news is often,
as I'll show later in an example,
this is how naturally you want to program
-- your algorithms naturally want to
access data when you have 10 million
threads flying through the system.
Often the threads are working on
neighboring parts of the problem,
neighboring parts of the data.
They'll naturally read neighboring
values and get that good performance.
performance.
So as a result,
brute force algorithms often
result in the best performance.
The complex stuff you may have used to
doing your traditional C and CPU code,
where you're trying to minimize
the number of memory accesses,
typically the best performance
is just the brute force one.
Create a thread per every
data element in your problem,
solve the problem for that thread,
and the memory subsystem likes
that kind of memory access.
So here's a simple example.
Typically in fluid simulations,
we're updating our
forces within the fluid.
It's a little different kind
of fluid than we showed before.
But let's say I have a simulation grid,
and I want to update my fluid motion.
I want to keep the pressures
normalized in the system.
Water is an incompressible solution.
So usually what we do is
we perform our updates,
and then we have to
normalize the pressure.
Normalizing the pressure is simply
doing a local pressure calculation
for every grid cell in my simulation,
and seeing what the differences are
and trying to normalize the velocities
of all the fluid so that we keep the
pressure constant across the fluid.
This is simply a neighborhood
kind of calculation.
In my grid cell,
I look at my neighboring pressure
and my pressure and try to normalize.
Simple add operation.
But I have to do this
across all the cells.
in the simulation.
There's the diagram.
So I'll have one thread be
working on the green cell,
looking at my neighbors,
influencing my pressure.
I'll obviously have a
thread for every cell,
looking at my neighbors,
updating my pressures.
So there's two kinds of
ways we do this on the GPU.
The first way,
and the way I'd recommend you start,
is just do a simple
brute force algorithm.
Create a thread for every grid cell.
We get lots of threads, bring it,
the GPU loves it,
and then we'll get great
streaming performance.
Because if we look across
the different threads,
everyone's going to
read the guy above them.
Well, that's one big wide memory access,
as seen by the GPU.
Then we'll read everyone to the right.
That's again, one big wide memory read,
as seen by the GPU, and below.
So typically,
that brute force algorithm works great.
And this just doesn't apply
to the fluid simulation.
We've seen this in image processing.
We see this in more complex
stuff like ray tracing.
Often,
you start with a brute force algorithm.
It's the simplest thing to code up,
and often gives you the great
performance right from the starting gate.
There's another big
possibility for improvement is,
like I mentioned before,
use the local memory.
So what I can do is take the fluid,
the grid simulation, all those pressures,
copy some region of it,
the region that my threads care about,
the threads in my thread
group might care about,
into the local memory.
Now I have much better,
the threads can work together
to not overfetch their data.
Every thread we can spin
on the local memory,
perhaps do multiple iterations of the
pressure solve to try to normalize
all the pressures in the system.
But using the local memory,
which is 700 gigabytes a
second of memory bandwidth.
So that was a really quick introduction
of some of the top three things that
you want to do to keep the GPU busy.
It is a massively data
parallel processor.
Don't be afraid to kick
off millions of threads.
We can handle it.
We love it.
It keeps the GPU busy.
Threads are really cheap.
The GPUs have dedicated hardware to
keep all those threads busy and active.
And we need that in order to
keep all the pipelines full.
The other big point is
use the local memory.
Huge speedups have been seen by
taking stuff out of the memory,
putting it in that local-- think
of it as a software managed cache.
You get to decide what goes in the cache,
not some hardware prediction
scheme or caching scheme.
It's under your software control.
You simply declare
variables that are local.
They get allocated to that memory,
and you can control
reads and writes into it.
The other big point is you want
to think about memory access.
The threads are all working together.
They're going to see similar
memory-- they're going to perform
their memory accesses together.
Don't waste time
optimizing for one thread.
Don't start with the most complex
CPU data structure you know
about to minimize memory access.
Just start with the brute force one.
You'll be surprised.
It's simple, and you'll get great
performance right off the bat.
So that was a brief overview.
I'm going to introduce now the next Ian,
and he's going to talk about
optimizing compute kernels.
Thanks.
Thank you.
So it was something of a question
to me what to say after five people
in a row have talked about OpenCL.
So I think the best thing I can do
right now is to sort of bring it
all together and give an example of
sort of bringing it down to earth
in the context of how you'd be
programming in your own application.
So the first question you
have to ask yourself is,
like, when do I use OpenCL?
There are a lot of other
technologies out there,
so I'll try to give you some context.
And then after that,
I'm going to work through a version
of the NBody simulation that you've
been seeing to sort of show how our
developer tools work in conjunction
with this and some survival
techniques for working with this.
So when to use OpenCL?
OpenCL, as you've learned,
is great for large,
data-intensive problems.
It's really good for
expensive computations,
anything that might touch
data more than once,
like an NLogN implementation in op.
And it's great for highly
parallelizable problems.
If your problem is really tiny,
then perhaps if you'd just written
a little piece of code to do that,
it might have finished before
OpenCL even got started.
If you're just limited by the
rate at which you can copy data
around by the bus bandwidth,
then you don't need a lot of
software to help you out on this.
You're basically bottlenecked by the bus,
and the software isn't
going to change that.
Think twice before putting
inherently sequential problems
that simply can't be parallelized.
OpenCL is a data parallel
programming environment.
If you have no parallelism,
it's not going to help you much.
And similarly, you could have a highly
parallel algorithm,
but it might be constantly synchronizing
back and forth and tripping over itself.
So those things might
not work so well either.
And finally,
the OpenCL kernels right now don't
have object-oriented code in them.
and of course call OpenCL from
object-oriented code.
So here's examples of some
other high-performance
technologies you might use.
There's Accelerate Framework,
which is Apple's proprietary
framework consisting of APIs for
common computational algorithms like
convolutions or FFTs or linear algebra,
big number computation,
that kind of thing.
And they're all hand-tuned by engineers
who sit there and stare at one piece of
code all day and eventually check it in.
And it's really great if it does
the thing that you need to do.
And I used to work in that
group up until recently.
And that was always
sort of my frustration,
is like I would have to sort
of predict ahead of time
what everybody needed to do.
And sometimes I get it right,
sometimes I get it wrong.
And quite often,
there's something in your application
which is its heart and soul.
It's a specialized computation
that you need to do that
makes your application work.
And if you don't know what
application what it is,
that's probably not going to be there.
So Accelerate Framework is
something you could plug in.
It'll help in a few places,
but often you need to go
ahead and write your own code.
And that's really where OpenCL comes in,
because we let you write your own
kernel and have it executed in
a highly parallel environment,
hopefully with good performance.
There's also OpenGL.
If you have a purely graphical task,
it's an excellent thing.
Previously in GPU areas,
people might have used
OpenCL for a lot of things.
But now, it's a little bit different.
So if you're using
OpenCL for a lot of things,
you might want to use
OpenCL for a lot of things.
But now, it's a little bit different.
So if you're using
OpenCL for a lot of things,
you might want to use
OpenCL for a lot of things.
People might have used OpenGL shaders
to do general computation,
but you've got to couch your
algorithm in terms of pixels
and vertices and whatever else.
And so it kind of gets in the way.
So that's great for graphics,
but OpenCL is really designed to open
up the wide space of algorithms that
you might want to write and give you
the language and ability to write those.
So there's also the question of,
should I be using the GPU?
And GPU has great bandwidth
to its own internal memory,
and even better bandwidth to
the local memory as described.
But you do have to get the
data over there right now
with current architectures.
And it's sitting on the
other side of a PCIe bus.
The throughput over the PCIe bus is
about three to four gigabytes a second.
And if you're thinking
in terms of CPU terms,
well, that's maybe around one
byte for every CPU cycle.
So what could I have done
on the CPU during that time?
Well, I could do four single precision
multiplies in the vector unit.
I could do four single precision adds.
I could copy four floats
somewhere out of the register.
I could have done four
loads as a vector load.
stores as a vector load.
And in fact,
I could have done all of those things
in that one cycle concurrently.
So you could get quite a
lot done in that CPU cycle.
Usually when you're writing code,
you aren't operating on one byte.
I might want to multiply
two floats together,
and that's eight bytes of data.
And during that time,
I could have done this much computation.
And of course,
we don't have just one CPU.
We might have eight CPUs.
So I could have done that much work.
And of course,
I might have to get the data back.
So that might mean
copying eight bytes back.
So I could have gotten that
much work done on the CPU.
So you really want to focus on
the GPUs to move problems that
Move your data over there and
keep it there as long as you can.
You might have to copy it back
in order to do something with it,
but you really want to just get it there
and take advantage of the bandwidth on
the device and use that as best you can.
And if that process is too expensive
for your overall computation,
then maybe you're better
off just stay on the CPU.
Don't bounce beta back and forth.
and so I'm going to move
forward onto the simulation.
This is the same simulation or a similar
one as the one you've seen before.
We have a system of n particles.
They all have a gravity
interaction between them all,
and we calculate them all.
A little bit of a disclosure here.
We're using a substandard algorithm.
We're really actually calculating
the direct interaction between every
particle and every other particle,
so there's an n squared cost here.
There are algorithms published out
which are significantly cheaper.
So in our context,
we're doing this because
it's great for demos,
but it's not going to
be good for your users.
So if you really want to sell a product,
make sure you're using
the right algorithm.
If you're a scientist,
obviously you want to make sure
you get in the right journal.
You don't want to stand up here in
front of a thousand people and then
have a second year grad student say,
I used a different algorithm,
and I can get better performance
with my scientific calculator.
So -- It's always disheartening when
you hear that after months of work.
Make sure you have the
right algorithm first.
This is not just OpenCL.
This is any bit of optimization.
So you don't want to pour your
heart and soul into something
and realize that you're just
completely on the wrong track.
So I'd like to switch over to the demo.
[Transcript missing]
So we can run that.
And I haven't really done any
tweaking on the graphics on this,
so it's just going to show
the particles moving around.
And we're getting somewhere
around 2 gigaflops.
But as you notice,
this is probably not something
the end user is going to want,
because this is barely moving.
And it's flipping the
frames every second or two.
So well, OK, what do I need to do?
Well, let's haul out Shark.
And I can quickly take a sample on it
and see what my application is doing.
Am I spending too much time drawing?
Am I spending too much
time doing something else?
No, indeed.
My update particles,
which is this function I just showed
you that iterates over the particles,
is actually consuming 98.6% of the time.
And so obviously,
I need to focus my efforts there.
Well, I've heard about OpenCL.
And those guys from Apple,
they told me that, oh,
I could use that to run on multiple CPUs.
Obviously, I'm not using it.
I've got the full potential of my device.
I've only got one CPU busy with this.
So let's try that.
I'll put this away and switch
over to the OpenCL project.
So what have I done here?
Well, I have the same create particle
set that initializes my positions.
And at the end, instead of just putting
it in a regular array,
I've created a CL array using that data.
And this is a device that just tells CL,
okay, here's my data.
And CL needs this because it
needs to be able to copy your
data over onto the compute device,
whatever that may be.
I've also taken my
original update kernel,
update particles function,
and rewritten it as a kernel.
Here I've got the kernel written
as a series of C strings.
You can also put it off in
a separate file if you like.
I have it this way because I wanted
to have a C preprocessor thing
embedded in there for my own use.
And you can see that these look pretty
similar with one interesting thing.
You'll notice the inner loop actually
is quite a bit smaller in CL,
and that's because CL has native vector
types and native vector arithmetic.
So whereas before, I had to write out in
scalar code the x component,
the y component,
and the z component for calculating the
distance from one object to another,
here I can just do it in
one line of vector code.
And down here, again,
I've got the velocity component
calculated component-wise,
whereas I can do it in
one line of vector code.
So in some ways,
this may actually clean up your
code and give you a little bit
more of an idea of what's going on.
So I've added a little bit of
vector acceleration for free,
pretty much.
So we can run this.
Stop the other task.
Run the new one.
Here's my thing.
Oops.
Oh, dear.
There went all my data.
Well, what did I do wrong?
So just to reassure you, this is a bug,
but I found this bug two weeks ago.
So I'll just walk through the
process I went through to find
out what was causing this.
So I've added a little printout.
I've added a little pnf in here
to read the output from the array,
just to get some hint
about what happened.
So I can run the debug version.
It should spew coordinates from my stuff.
And eventually,
if this was working correctly,
we would actually see NANDs appear.
It looks like it's freezing.
So anyway, what we saw was a bunch of
NANDs appear in the data.
You don't have to bear with me.
So like, well,
where were these coming from?
So what I can do is when
OpenCL compiles your kernel,
it's compiling it at runtime.
So the usual set of symbols that would
normally be expected to accompany
your binary in this case aren't there.
So there's no symbol to stay in GBA,
okay,
I want you to break on my filter here,
or kernel here,
because it doesn't know what
that is because there's no
symbol in your binary because the
function never was in your binary.
It's just sitting here as a C string.
So the question is how do I stop there?
So what I've done is I've taken
my kernel and I've instrumented
it with some new lines of code.
Here I'm just looking at all of my data.
I have one for the position and one
for a distance and one for a velocity.
And I'm checking to see if any is NANDs
-- any NANDs appeared in the data.
And if so,
I call this function called breakpoint.
Is breakpoint some
magical thing in OpenCL?
Absolutely not.
It's just a little function
I wrote right here,
and I'm going to put a breakpoint there.
So I can run this in the debugger.
And once it comes up,
I noticed I landed in my breakpoint.
One of the things I did
when I created this--
The thing is I passed a different
number to each breakpoint,
so I actually know which one it was.
So this time I landed in breakpoint 3,
so I can go look and say, oh,
breakpoint 3, okay, that's this one.
So it looks like one of my input
velocities had a NAN in it.
Well, how did that happen?
Well, I have a hint here.
I also put in a breakpoint
for the output velocity,
so it seems like if my kernel
ran and produced a NAN,
and then I read it in later,
I would have caught this earlier
in a different breakpoint.
So apparently my input
velocities are busted.
In the very first frame, well,
how do I manage that?
Well, we can go up to my
create particles thing,
and I realize, well, okay,
these are actually a vector full of XYZW.
I forgot to initialize the W,
so I have just random data in there.
So let me fix this.
And that's where the NAN came from,
or so I would assert.
And I'll fix that up,
and we'll rerun it again.
And there we go.
Now the simulation is running.
So -- and you can see we're
using all the CPUs up here,
and I'm running much
faster than 2 gigaflops,
and now somewhat closer to 10.
So that's great.
But we think, well, gee, wait a minute,
I am running on 8 CPUs here,
but only going maybe 5 times faster.
Well, what happened there?
Well,
we can take a look in Shark once again.
And so here is-- because we have no
symbol information for the kernel,
it's just showing up as unknown library.
So but this is, actually,
my update particles thing.
And then we have a called a square root.
Wait a minute.
Was that in my last one?
My original code?
No, there's no called a square root.
Well, my kernel does do a square root.
Maybe that came from there.
We can click down and see, oh,
there's a square root here.
So how did that happen?
Well, we can go and look at what the
GCC was doing in my original version.
Yeah,
it's got the square root instruction.
For some reason, OpenCL decided to call
the square root function.
Well, that's not really entirely optimal.
You'll have to believe me when I told
you I've already filed this bug.
In this particular case,
since we're just writing a demo,
we have to kind of ask ourselves, well,
did I really need a square
root in the first place?
And it turns out that in addition
to providing a full math library,
OpenCL also has a full half precision
math library which it does all
its work in single precision,
but it doesn't guarantee results
for anything better than what you
would need for half precision,
which is a 16 bit floating point type.
And since this is just a demo,
we can go in here and we can
change this to use that function.
And the advantage of throwing away some
precision is that it can run much faster.
So once again,
if you're going to go present
in a scientific conference,
I don't recommend doing this,
but since we're just at WWDC.
Just go for it.
So we'll rerun it.
And I have a little problem
with things getting stuck.
Let's see if I can get it to run.
OK, well, there it goes.
So we're getting about 22 gigaflops,
which is a lot better than 10.
Performing much better.
So we've gone through multi-threading
through the CPU and fixing one
little thing with the divide.
We've gone up a factor
of 11 in performance.
Well, we're not entirely done here.
Let me run this again.
And then I can sample it in Shark.
Let's jiggle this so it works.
If we go actually look at
what the kernel was doing,
we notice that there's actually
quite a bit of scalar code in there.
And that's because I haven't
really fully vectorized my stuff.
I have vector code here
and vector code here,
but this is all more
or less scalar stuff.
And we can see that if you
like looking at assembly,
we can in here, and we see all of these
scalar instructions right
in the middle of the loop.
So what can we do about that?
So can I switch back
to slides for a moment?
So the current data layout,
as I explained earlier,
just has packed x, y, z, w in it.
And for this calculation,
as we've already learned,
w doesn't really do anything.
And in fact, it causes trouble if there
happens to be a nan in that value.
So this is sort of bad
in a number of respects.
It wastes space on touching
more data than I need to.
And it forces us to write scalar
code in order to do much of the work.
And that's because,
as part of my calculation,
I need the z component to talk to
the x component in vector code.
They're in the wrong place in the vector.
So you have to move the z over by
the x and then do the operation.
And that sort of, in fact,
has the effect of turning what should
be vector code into something which
is executing more like scalar code.
Except it's worse than that,
because I have the extra
operations in there required to
move the z over to where the x is.
So instead, what I'm going to do
is reorganize my data.
So I'm walking through it in a
little more straight line fashion
for what the CPU would like.
I've thrown out the w component,
and I put the x, y,
and z in their own array.
So now when I load a
vector of four things,
it has four x's in it.
So I can do that for
four different particles.
And that uses 25% less space.
All the operations are vertical now,
and I have no more scalar code.
So I can show that code.
And so there it is running.
So that's a pretty good speedup from
220 to 84 gigaflops for vector code.
And we can actually go look at what
code I had to write to get that,
and it's pretty similar code.
Here it is.
It's the same thing over and over again.
The big difference is that X, Y,
and Z are now float 4s.
And so this is the vector code,
and you'll notice there
isn't a vec underbar or an
mm underbar anywhere in this.
It's all vectorized in OpenCL.
And so it's a lot cleaner and
hopefully more portable this way.
So you can do it like that.
So the next question is, well, great,
I've done that.
And now I know that some of
my users will be using GPUs.
Not all of them, of course,
but some of them will.
So I want to make sure
this works OK on the GPU.
So I can change one
character here to GPU.
And we'll rebuild it.
And we'll run it.
There we go.
Starting to move up.
And you'll notice that we aren't
really getting the hundreds of
gigaflops that we were hoping for.
Optimization has its
sort of ups and downs.
And we have to accept what we get.
And the reason is that I really
haven't done anything yet
to optimize for the GPU.
And it turns out that all
this stuff that Ian Buck was
talking about is very important.
So I'll cut the slides.
And I actually tried quite a few things.
I wrote several kernels
here and several down there.
So I'll cut the slides and show
you what actually worked for me.
So the first thing I tried was to
look at how many threads I was using.
In my CPU thing,
I defined 512 threads just because
that was the number I picked.
And it turned out that wasn't enough.
And if I actually define
thousands and thousands,
or in this case, 16,000 threads,
it ran twice as fast.
So that was kind of educational.
The other thing is that because I'm
running over the particle list over and
over and over again in every thread,
it turns out that for
every particle I do,
I end up touching all the other ones,
which means 16,000 loads for
every particle I calculate.
And so this is a case where copying
data to local memory is very important.
And I got a six-fold speed
increase on top of the two-fold
I already got by doing that.
Now,
it's not true that in every algorithm,
local is going to help you.
There are going to be some things
where you really actually end
up only touching the data once.
So copying from global to
local and reading it there
isn't really going to help you.
It's not really going to
be any much better than
directly accessing the global.
But you can define your problem
set to use the image type,
which is cached.
And you can take advantage of
the speed improvement there,
which I did,
but I don't have enough time to show you.
I also did a few other things.
I unrolled the inner loop four times.
This is the same sort of
trick you might use on a CPU.
It cuts down the loop overhead
and gives the compiler better
scheduling opportunities.
And then I did a couple of things.
I unrolled the inner loop four times.
I did a little more
optimization where I said,
well, I have a loop here to
copy from global to local,
but this is doing some strange things
because some of the threads are looping
through this twice and some of them
are looping through it three times.
And that means that there's
some divergence in what
the processors are doing.
So I carefully controlled the number
of thread groups I had according to the
local memory size that I had allocated
so that all the threads iterate through
the loop the same number of times.
And that gave me another 40
percent over the top of that.
So the overall improvement from my rather
disappointing result at first is 22x.
So I'll cut back to the slides,
and we can see that.
So there we have the
demo running on the GPU.
For comparison,
I've got the original ticking along.
It is moving, I promise.
So there you go.
So can we cut back to slides, please?
So I'd like to invite Jeff Stollup
to take any questions and to
talk about downloading materials
for working on these things.
Thanks very much Ian.
So, again,
Alan Schaffer is a Schaffer at Apple.com,
a good point of contact for questions you
may have in general about technologies,
and he can route those things to us.
The OpenCL developer resources,
as I said,
are on the attendee website for this
session and the previous session.
Definitely a must download for
you guys who want to use OpenCL.
It has the specification,
has release notes,
has an example project,
and also has an update for
the OpenCL on your C disk.
And finally,
we have a lab in the Mac Lab B this
afternoon at 2:00 p.m., and then the
OpenGL lab should be in the graphics
and media lab same time at 2:00 p.m.
if you have OpenGL related questions.